>> Richard Feldman: So if we go back and
apply this concept to Hello, World,
one of the things that might surprise you
is that when we're doing this write call,
and we're passing in 1,
that was actually a 32-bit integer.
So that was 32 ones and
zeros, which was to say,
the bottom one that we had
on the previous slide.
That basically means that if you want to,
you can specify up to 2 to the 32
different numbers in that.
And that gets you up to things like
4 billion or something like that.
Is the highest number you can
express in a 32-bit integer.
If you wanna go higher than that,
you would need to actually
reserve more bits in memory.
And if they wanted,
they could have said, well,
we're gonna have a lower
number of options.
And rather than it being a 32-bit
integer we'll save some memory, and
say you only get a 16-bit integer here,
and then you only get up to 65,000 max.
Or you could say it's only
an 8-bit integer, a byte, and
then you only get 256.
So it's really up to the designer of
the particular function to decide how
big the integers they wanna support are.
So yeah, this is literally what's
happening in memory, when we were seeing
the assembly instructions that were moving
the data into here it's literally this
many ones and zeros in memory
that's getting copied in there.
Now this right here,
if we want to just look at in memory,
what are the ones and
zeros that correspond to Hello?
These are the actual ones and
zeros in memory that correspond to Hello.
They are the bytes 48 which
corresponds to H, 65 is e,
108 is l, which is repeated,
and then 111 is o.
And this is basically a mapping that,
again, we've just decided upon.
We just made this up.
We just decided that when
you see these bit patterns,
this is what should get
printed on the screen.
It's an entirely,
outside the hardware concept,
the CPU has no idea what
a string encoding is.
It's just, yeah, I know about ones and
zeros, and we've just decided that,
yeah, when you do this, this is what
your teletype, I mean, what your screen,
should print out is these lines and
drawings that we recognize as letters.
So again,
we decide how to interpret the memory.
This is all about
the hardware doesn't care.
This is just we have decided to ascribe
certain meaning to these ones and zeros.
This particular encoding happens to be
ASCII, which is the American standard for
C, I actually don't remember
[LAUGH] Exactly what it stands for.
But it's basically a character encoding
that's just a way of saying, here's how
we're going to map these ones and
zeros to actual letters in that language.
Original ASCII did use,
in fact, 1-byte per character.
And actually, fortunately,
it only used 7 of the 8 bits.
Notice every single one of these starts
with a 0, and that's not a coincidence.
In ASCII, that's just always true.
ASCII always has the very first bit
set to be 0 just because they only
use 7 out of the 8 bits to represent
all of the letters they wanted to use.
Now, as it turns out, American English
is not all the languages in the world.
There's actually others.
And so yeah, this is where we got Unicode.
And fortunately, there was this really,
really clever encoding.
And it's required that if you ever
introduce someone to the concept of UTF-8,
you have to explain how clever this is.
But they managed to mix an encoding that
was backwards and compatible with ASCII,
which is basically if we were to
look at Unicode characters here,
this stuff that we have right here,
this is both ASCII and valid UTF-8.
Because UTF-8 cleverly said for
all of the first 256 characters that we
support in UTF-8, we're gonna choose to
have them be exactly the same as ASCII.
So UTF-8 is totally backwards
compatible with ASCII.
If you have some program that was using
ASCII for its strings in the 1970s and you
decide to upgrade UTF-8, all of that code
will still just completely work as is,
because UTF-8 represents those strings
exactly the same way in memory.
What they did was they said, we're gonna
use the fact that that first bit was
unused in ASCII and say, if we set that
first bit to a 1, now we're in UTF-8 land.
And that 1 indicates, okay, now we're
gonna shift gears and get into, okay,
now we're gonna do fancy Unicode stuff.
And all the old code
wasn't using that anyway.
None of the ASCII stuff ever
actually had a 1 there.
So it was totally fine to do that,
because that was sort of unused.
And so that first digit in ASCII is
unused, but in Unicode, sorry, in UTF-8,
it's a flag saying,
are we doing fancy Unicode stuff or not?
And then the other 7 bits are interpreted
differently depending on whether that
first bit was set.
And one of the things that UTF-8
allows is, again, we decide how
to interpret memory, is sometimes
depending on what the other 7 bits are,
UTF-8 might say, you know what, this
letter actually takes up multiple bytes.
We're gonna take this one, and
also we're gonna use this one, and
possibly also this one,
maybe even this one.
So that's one of the things that
they use to be able to expand
how many different character sets
you can encode in your text.
Okay, and then the final argument of write
is a 64-bit integer, meaning 64 ones and
zeros in memory.
So that means that you can have
a string that is very long here,
not just 32-bits, we said that goes
up to a string about 4 billion.
So you if this were a 32-bit integer,
you could only give write strings
that were up to 4 gigabytes.
And if it's an unsigned integer,
only 2 gigabytes.
If you've ever used Java,
Java came out in 1995 and
they made the decision to use
32-bit integers for everything.
And as a consequence of this, you can find
stack overflow posts and stuff talking
about hey, I'm trying to ingest this
CSV that's more than 2 gigabytes, or
maybe more than 4 gigabytes,
whatever, 5 gigabyte CSV, and
Java just won't let me do it.
And the reason for that is that
Java's arrays are 32-bit integers.
So they just literally cannot
conceptualize something that's
longer than that.
You have to break it up into multiple
arrays and kind of work around that.
Whereas in C,
you can have multiple different sizes,
including 64-bit integers.
So 64-bit means you can have,
I think it's 9 undecillion.
I had to learn the word undecillion
in order to learn how big
64-bit integers can represent things.
It's more than gigabytes,
I'll tell you that.
[LAUGH] So yeah.
We actually don't currently have any piece
of hardware in the world that can max out
a 64-bit integer worth of memory,
nothing supports that that big.
Maybe someday they will.
But, yeah, it's gonna be quite a long time
before we feel, we really gotta bump it up
to 128-bit integers to really
maximally support these things.
Yeah?
>> Speaker 2: Where in the translation or
where does the translation for
UTF-8 actually happen?
Is that on the operating system level or
where?
>> Richard Feldman: That's
a great question.
So the question was, where does
the translation for UTF-8 actually happen?
It actually depends on
what's doing the displaying.
So for example, when we're running at the
Command line, it's actually your terminal
application, or more specifically,
the shell that's interpreting that.
So when you say, write to standard out,
you're basically just, here's some bytes,
have fun with that.
And then it's up to some combination of
the shell and the terminal to read those
bytes and be, I'm deciding to interpret
these bytes that I'm getting as UTF-8.
I'm gonna render them accordingly.
I don't know if this is still supported,
but
certainly some older shells would give
you a drop down for how to interpret it.
So, for example, before Unicode
sort of emerged as the standard,
you would have different localization.
So for example, if you were in Japan,
you would have a terminal it was
interpreting the same bytes differently.
And you could select from a drop down,
this is the Japanese
encoding of of these bytes.
I have a friend who was into
anime back in the 90s, and
he would get these video or
audio files that were encoded in Japanese.
And literally, his software that tried
to play them would crash because it was
trying to display these
Japanese encoded characters.
They would get the bytes off of the disc,
and it's, here's some bytes for you.
And his program, the music player or
whatever, would try to display them and
it would crash because it was trying to
interpret them as ASCII or something else.
And they just didn't fit what it was
expecting and some edge case happened and
it would just crash.
So yeah, the short answer is it's
not the operating system, but
rather some program running on
the operating system that's
actually in charge of translating
these bytes into pixels on the screen.
Whoever his job is to do that, somewhere
in that thing, probably the shell, or
it could just be your UI
program is doing that.
Also worth noting that in Windows, it's
actually super common not to use UTF-8,
but rather to use UTF-16.
And also in the browser,
it's super common to use UTF-16.
We're gonna use UTF-8 here because
when you're doing HTTP, HTTP is UTF-8,
that's what we're doing.
And also UTF-8 has definitely kind of
emerged as the most popular standard
these days.
These days,
people tend to view UTF-16 as sort of
a maybe kind of a historical mistake.
It's sort of being phased out.
But along the way, Java use UTF-16,
JavaScript use UTF-16 behind the scenes
in the browser, and all the Microsoft
Windows APIs are UTF-16, at least for now.
Now you might be surprised to learn that
the write function actually takes three
integers.
Now that might be strange because it
looks like it takes an integer and
then a string and then an integer, but for
real, it really does take three integers.
And that's because what's actually being
passed to write is an integer namely
the memory address of the first byte
in the string in the actual binary.
So back when we were talking
about the assembly stuff,
we talked about how there was that LC0
section that corresponds to there's some
bytes in your final binary executable.
And one of the things the C compiler will
do is everywhere you see this string,
it's gonna substitute
the memory address of that.
So essentially, what's happening
here is that these ones and
zeros, these exist at some
point in your binary.
And this right here is
the integer of this first one.
It's this 0 right here, this very
beginning of this section of memory,
I just made this number up,
I don't know what it actually would be.
But it's some whatever,
wherever in your binary this thing starts,
that's what the C compiler
is gonna insert here.
And when you get down to the actual
assembly, when you call write,
you're passing an integer for
this, a 32-bit integer.
This is gonna be a 64-bit integer, and
this is gonna be another 64-bit integer.
That's what's actually getting
passed to that function.
Each of these you can think
of as essentially memory is
basically a giant array of bytes.
So the address of this
one is ending in a 2.
This one is the same thing ending in a 3.
This one's ending in a 4.
That's the address of each of these,
essentially an index into that gigantic
array that you can conceptually think of
as the memory of the running process and
so on and so forth.
So basically, I think this is a really
good way to think about memory,
is that it is basically
a gigantic array of bytes.
And then we can choose to interpret that
gigantic array of bytes in different ways,
depending on whether we wanna think of
this part of that gigantic array as,
this part's the string right here,
and this part's a 32-bit integer, and
this part's a 64-bit integer.
Something that we're gonna do a lot of in
this course and that is a major part of C
programming is working in terms
of these memory addresses.
These are actual integers that
correspond to an index into this
giant array of memory.
So essentially, the reason that we saw we
were able to read memory garbage in our
example is that basically what write takes
in addition to where do you wanna write,
it's give me a start index into memory.
This is the address into that array,
the index into this gigantic global array.
And then tell me the length, tell me
how many slots do you wanna to read,
how many bytes?
So basically saying yeah, start here and
just print out whatever
the next 13 bytes are.
Now that's exactly why when I changed it
to 200 or 2,000 it was start here and
print out the next 2,000
elements in that array.
That's exactly how you're able
to get [LAUGH] exposed secrets.
It's yeah, if we keep going and there's
some secrets later on in the array,
they're getting printed cuz
that's all this function does.
So on the one hand,
this is a very simple design.
It's basically, where do you wanna write?
What's the start index of
the bytes in memory and
how many bytes of that gigantic array
that we call memory do you wanna write?
On the other hand, we can also see how
this simplicity is both powerful and
also very, very error-prone.
If you get this wrong, all bets are off.
Whatever happens to be in that memory is
being sent to whatever destination we give
to write.
Okay, now I wanna address
the term pointer.
For the purposes of this workshop, I'm
gonna tend to use the term memory address
because I think it's more intuitive, but
you will encounter this term pointer.
And it's famously a term that a lot
of people tend to associate with,
it took me a long time to
understand what pointers mean.
That's how I'm gonna use
the term memory address.
But if you ever do encounter this term,
pointer just means memory address.
There's this kind of funny tweet.
It's, hey, why are people
constantly complaining they don't
understand pointers?
Pointers are just an index into a global
array of bytes that we call memory.
What's the problem?
And I think the formulation of this is
supposed to be a take on the old joke.
Cuz, of course, monads are also
famously hard for people to understand.
And the old joke is, monads are just
monoids in the category of endofunctors,
what's the problem?
I assume that's what he's referencing
with what's the problem here?
So the point of this is
essentially that the term pointer,
whenever you hear anyone talk about that,
they literally just mean memory address.
They mean a number that's an index into
the giant global array of bytes that we
call memory.
So I'm gonna use the term memory
address for this workshop, but
if you ever hear people
talking about pointers,
that's what they're talking about.